Review "The Unicode Cookbook for Linguistics"

This books gives an overview of the intersection of the IPA alphabet and
Unicode, preceded by a discussion of foundational concepts in writing
systems, and followed by the suggestion to establish "Orthography
profiles" as a theoretical concept, which are are in turn implemented in
Python and R.

Global evaluation:
The book is concise and can serve as a useful manual for Linguists Who
Have Always Wondered About Unicode But Never Dared To Ask. The
exposition of the background is in general well organised and easy to
follow (for a technical paper). The writing is good in general, but
sometimes repetitive. Minor suggestions for reorganisation of passages
are given below. A higher amount of illustrations and charts would make
that part more accessible.

The orthography profiles section is less well written and at times a bit
confused. It does not seem completely finished either, since there are
dangling references and literal TODO in the text. For this section, it
will be necessary to have a very clear picture about the intended
audience. For instance, do the authors assume the readers know bash,
python and R? Most passages do, but some passages explain things that a
tech-savvy audience will well be aware of and find tedious. The language
of the implementation part is of less high quality than the introductory
parts.

The authors should check the use of single and double quotes across the
paper, which is incoherent. As far as I can tell, all instances of
material currently enquoted should be in double quotes. Also, the
authors should check Special Capitalization, which is used in some
places. Finally, the bibliography has recurrent issues relating to
naming of organizations, capitalization, and missing places of
publication and needs to be thoroughly revised.

A section which is missing in something called a "Cookbook" would be
practical recommendations on how to input Unicode characters. There are
various character selection tools, shortcuts on the keyboard, the
shapecatcher website references at several places, or the Wikipedia
lists of glyphs and fileformat.info. Having all this in one section
would be handy for the user. It is of course unrelated to the
orthography profiles, but I imagine that many people will use this book
as a primer on IPA+Unicode and actually disregard the last two chapters.
For this group, such a summary would be useful.





























